---
layout: about
permalink: /
title: <strong>Robert</strong> Utterback
description: <a href="http://ou.monmouthcollege.edu/academics/computer-science">Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science</a> | <a href="http://www.monmouthcollege.edu">Monmouth College</a>

profile:
  align: right
  image: prof_pic.jpg
  address: >
    <p>CSB 342</p>
    <p>700 E. Broadway</p>
    <p>Monmouth, IL 61462</p>

news: true
social: true
---

I am an associate professor in the department of Mathematics,
Statistics, and Computer Science at [Monmouth
College](http://www.monmouthcollege.edu). I got my Ph.D. in Computer
Science from [Washington University in
St. Louis](http://www.wustl.edu) under [Kunal
Agrawal](http://www.cse.wustl.edu/~kunal/) and [Angelina
Lee](http://www.cse.wustl.edu/~angelee/) and my B.S. in mathematics
and computer science from [Truman State
University](http://www.truman.edu). My research involves both
theoretical and systems aspects of parallel computing, including
scheduling, runtime systems, and dynamic program analysis. I am also
interested in interdisciplinary data science, especially machine
learning for text analysis.

**Seeking a temporary/contract software engineer position!** I will
start my first sabbatical in May 2024. During this time I'd like to
experience what my students do when they graduate, so my goal is to
work as a part of an agile software development team. My deep
expertise in C++ and Python, wide knowledge across the spectrum of
computer science, and proven ability to quickly pick up new
technologies overcome my limited industry experience. I can provide a
unique perspective to your team. My sabbatical is flexible and can be
extended as far as August 2025. If you're interested in having me on
your team, shoot me an email!
