---
layout: class
title: "COMP 235, Fall 2021, Program 1"
semester: f21
---

## Intro to C

#### Due Wednesday, September 1 by the start of class.

You will need to do this assignment on the department server
(`cs.monm.edu`). Start early so you can comfortable in that
environment.

### Part 1: Exponentiation

Starting from [this template](expt.c), complete the `power`
function. It takes in a base (a `double`), an exponent called `exp`
(an `int`), and should return `base` raised to the `exp` power. In
other words, base<sup>exp</sup>.

The `main` function allows the user to enter inputs and perform the
exponentiation operation. If you would like to write tests for your
code (recommended), place it near the `TESTING HERE` block at the
start of `main()`. Do not modify below that point.

For testing, you might try running `man assert` on the command line,
or try searching for "assert.h" online.

### Part 2: FooBar

Start from [this template](foobar.c). First, complete the `foobar`
function. Given an input integer `n`, `foobar` should loop from 1 to n
(inclusive). For each number, `foobar` will print a value on a
separate line. If the number is divisible by 4, it should print
"Foo". If the number is divislbe by 6, it should print "Bar". If the
number is divisible by 4 AND 6, it should print "FooBar". Otherwise,
it should print the number itself.

For example, calling `foobar(7)` should print

	> 1
	> 2
	> 3
	> Foo
	> 5
	> Bar
	> 7

Your `main` function should first check the number of arguments. The
program itself should take exactly one argument, e.g., `./a.out
7`. With any other number of arguments, the program should print an
error message and immediately stop, returning 1.

When given a single argument, you should convert the argument into an
integer, call `foobar` with it, and return 0. You do not need to do
any error checking on the argument itself -- you may assume it is an
integer.

### Submission

We will submit using the `handin` program. Assuming you have not
renamed the files, you can run

```sh
handin comp235 prog1 expt.c foobar.c
```

to submit your solutions. You can run this command multiple times in
case you discover an error after submitting.
