---
layout: class
title: "COMP 402: Senior Project Implementation, Spring 2022"
catalog-desc: (todo)
semester: s22
---

*{{ site.data.policies.syllabus_deviation_v2 }}*

* toc
{:toc}

## Logistics

* Class meetings: 
  * Schedule: Wednesdays 3:45 PM - 4:20 PM 
  * Location: CSB 303 or via the Zoom Room (emailed)
* Instructors: 
  * Robert Utterback
	* Physical Office: {{ site.data.me.office }}
	* [Personal Zoom Room]({{ site.data.me.zoom }})
	* Office Phone: {{ site.data.me.phone }}
	* Website: [{{ site.url }}]({{ site.url }})
	* Email: rutterback at MONMOUTHCOLLEGE dot EDU
  * James *Logan* Mayfield
	* Physical Office: CSB 344
	* Office Phone: 309.457.2200
	* Email: lmayfield at MONMOUTHCOLLEGE dot EDU
	* Website: [jlmayfield.github.io](http://jlmayfield.github.io)
* Course Website: <a href="{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}">{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}</a>
* Credits: 0.5 course credits
* Prerequisites: COMP 401.
* Feedback: At any time during the course you can use
  [this]({{ site.data.semesters[page.semester].feedback_form }}) to provide
  anonymous suggestions, criticism, praise, etc.

## Content and Goals

The senior project is the culminating experience of a student's major
in computer science and draws upon everything the student has learned
over the course of their studies. The project itself is a means to an
end and not the ultimate goal of the capstone experience. Sufficiently
interesting and complex projects rely on an abundance of existing
research and fundamental principles of computing. The project is, from
this perspective, a concrete instantiation of these ideas and
principles. By carrying out the project and presenting their work to
technical and non-technical audiences students can demonstrate their
understanding and mastery of some core element of the computing
sciences as it appears in the real world context of their project.

Students are ultimately working towards pinpointing general, abstract,
or theoretical concepts that support their project and clearly
articulating how their work is a specific instance of these
concepts. An important part of this process is the identification of
seminal scholarly work that addresses the concept and its
applications. Students too often attempt to reinvent the wheel in the
course of their capstone work. Occasionally they're unaware that the
wheel already exists. The emphasis on fundamentals is about
identifying the wheels, the documents that lay out the general
principles of those wheels, and focusing on applying those principles
to the specific needs of the project. In doing so the student will
better understand where their work sits in the broad spectrum of
computing and can present it as such.

COMP 402 is focused on the implementation of the plans proposed by the
student in COMP 401 and the identification of the concrete
instantiation of fundamental principles of data science at play within
the various facets of the project. Each student in the class will give
checkpoint presentations on a semiregular basis in order to receive
feedback from peers and faculty regarding the current state of student
projects and their understanding of the project’s underlying
fundamentals. Towards the end of the semester, students will use their
project as the basis for a Scholar’s Day poster and accompanying
presentation.

## Attendance and Expectations

Students in this course are expected to be respectful of their peers
and the instructor. As this course is comprised entirely of student
presentations, it is crucial that all students are always present and
always on time. Failure to arrive on time and be a productive member
of the course will have a detrimental effect on the final grade and
leaves a bad impression with faculty that are likely targets for job
and graduate school recommendations.

## Course Deliverables

The following elements of COMP 401 contribute to the overall capstone grade:

* Checkpoint presentations
* A Scholar's Day poster
* A final presentation
* A publicly available, completed project
* A bibliography of foundational work

### Checkpoint Presentations

The class will meet for regular project checkpoints. At these
checkpoints each student will give a 5--7 minute presentation that
covers:

<!-- TODO: put this in a separate css file. -->
<style type="text/css">
    ol ol { list-style-type: lower-alpha; }
</style>
	

1. The state of the project (1–2 minutes):
   1. The expected state for this checkpoint based off the current time line
   2. The actual state with a demonstration of progress
   3. The expected state for the next checkpoint
2. Fundamentals (4–5 minutes)
   1. Concepts, theories, and abstract principles
   2. Seminal research and literature
   3. Project specific instantiations
   
It is important to note that the bulk of each presentation is
dedicated to the presentation of data science fundamentals as they
appear in the project. The goal is to get accustomed to presenting the
project in the context of a larger issue in as opposed to simply
presenting the project.

### Scholar’s Day Posters & Final Presentations

By the midpoint of the semester students will have identified at least
one fundamental principle that acts as a cornerstone of their
project. One of these principles will become the subject of the
Scholar’s Day poster. It is important that students understand that
*the project is not the subject of the poster but the vehicle by which
the actual subject is presented*.

The poster is to be done in the standard scientific research
style. The CSB is ripe with examples of this kind of poster. Students
will begin submitting drafts of their posters beginning shortly after
midterm, and the final posters will be presented as a part of the
Scholar's Day poster session.

The final presentation will be a 7–-10 minute self-evaluation and
debrief about your capstone experience. During this time you should
briefly discuss the final state of your project, what you think went
well this semester, what could have gone better, and what advice you
might have for current and future 401/402 students as they begin
working on their project.

### Completed Project

By the end of the semester each student must have a completed
project. It may not entail everything proposed in COMP 401 but it
should be complete by some measurable sense of the word. For example,
it may be a rough prototype of the proposed project or lack some of
the originally proposed features, but still carries out some clearly
identifiable part of the project as proposed. What is important is that
it stands on its own and that the student presents it as such. Too
often students lament the features they didn't get to and
overemphasize what the project might have been as opposed to what it
finally ended up being.

The final version of the project must be submitted to the instructors
by Scholar's Day. In addition, students must find a means of making
their work publicly available. Standard paths to this include, but are
not limited to:

* Making the project open-source and hosting the code on a site like
  Github.
* Making a completed application available on an app-store or some
  similar means of distribution.
* Uploading a paper to a pre-print archive.
* Submitting a paper for publication.
* Hosing a website on a public server.

The exact means by which projects are made publicly accessible must be
approved by the instructors ahead of time. Projects must be publicly
accessible by Scholar's Day.

### Project Bibliography

The poster and presentation are in-depth demonstrations of the
students ability to connect their work to a singular larger issues in
computing. This bibliography is a demonstration of the student’s
ability to continue this practice across a broader range of issues as
they relate to their the project. Over the course of COMP 401 and COMP
402 students should have accumulated several key texts related to the
foundational data science that underlies their project. The project
bibliography should list and cite all of these sources. Some of these
will be cited on the poster and presentation, some will
not. Multifaceted projects will rely on many different ideas and
should thereby have a lengthier bibliography. More constrained
projects might have shorter bibliographies as a reflection of their
narrower focus. Either way, the bibliography should accurately reflect
the breadth and scope of the project.

## Grading

At the completion of this course, the grade for both COMP 401 and
COMP 402 is determined. Students will typically receive the same grade
in both courses to reflect the work throughout the capstone project
and not in one individual phase of the project. Grades will be
determined based on the following items:

* Appropriateness of project difficulty
* COMP 401 checkpoints
* COMP 401 Technical Presentation
* COMP 401 Proposal Poster
* COMP 401 Written Proposal
* COMP 401 Proposal Presentation
* COMP 402 Checkpoint Presentations
* COMP 402 Scholar's Day Research Poster
* COMP 402 Final Presentation
* A Completed Project
* A Project Bibliography

The following examples provide an idea of what we are looking for in
the above items. **These are rough guidelines only!** Assessment
can vary considerably depending on the project.

* **A/A-/B+ range**. Steady progress is made (more or less) from start
  to finish. The student takes ownership of the project and approaches
  it the right way, with an occasional mishap. The real key is that
  **progress can be explained and justified by the student**.
* **B range**. Attempts are made to explain/justify work, but
  explanations often lack a certain level of understanding. Students
  with projects in this range are clearly saying what they think they
  need to say, sometimes reciting technical information taken verbatim
  from various sources.
* **B-/C+ range**. Little to no real planning and research in 401. An
  idea is proposed and the student talks a lot about what they want to
  do, but they never really engage in the problems they'll encounter
  when developing the project. But the student regroups in 402,
  working the right way and providing some level of understanding in
  their work.
* **C range**. Little to no real planning and research in 401 that
  carries through to 402. The student is unable to explain and justify
  their work beyond showing that something happens. Something works,
  but there are lots of bugs or missing features, sometimes including
  large components.
* **C- range or worse** Little appreciable progress throughout 401
  and 402. The student is unable to explain what they did, nor what is
  really going on in the code. The code works sometimes but not most
  times. The student shows clear signs of stringing together code or
  material from other sources with no understanding.

### Course Engagement and Workload Expectations

The weekly workload for this course will vary by student but on
average should be about 5--7 hours per week. Since class meetings are
only scheduled for 1 hour a week, we expect students to dedicate at
least 4--6 hours a week towards the development of their project
proposal and implementation. This time can include research, coding,
writing, meeting with professors, and so forth. Being a capstone
project, it is likely that your weekly work will occasionally exceed
the expected amount -- everything takes longer than you think!

## Schedule

Checkpoint presentations will occur on roughly a weekly basis. Unless
otherwise specified, the topics listed below are the topics of
checkpoint presentations. These topics correspond to some or all of
sections of the final proposal. *This calendar is subject to change
based on the circumstances of the course.*

{: .schedule}
| Week   | Date             | Checkpoint                   |
|--------+------------------+------------------------------|
| <l4>   | <l18>            | <l35>                        |
| 1      | 01/10 -- 01/14   | Initial Meeting              |
| 2      | 01/17 -- 01/21   | Checkpoint 1.                |
| 3      | 01/24 -- 01/28   |                              |
| 4      | 01/31 -- 02/04   | Checkpoint 2.                |
| 5      | 02/07 -- 02/11   |                              |
| 6      | 02/14 -- 02/18   | Checkpoint 3.                |
| 7      | 02/21 -- 02/25   |                              |
| 8      | 02/28 -- 03/04   | Checkpoint 4.                |
| --     | (03/07 -- 03/11) | (Spring Break)               |
| 9      | 03/14 -- 03/18   | Poster draft.                |
| 10     | 03/21 -- 03/25   | Checkpoint 5. Poster draft.  |
| 11     | 03/28 -- 04/01   | Poster draft.                |
| 12     | 04/04 -- 04/08   | Checkpoint 6. Poster draft.  |
| 13     | 04/11 -- 04/15   | Poster and Bibliography Due. |
| 14     | 04/18 -- 04/22   | Scholar's Day? Poster due.   |
| 15     | 04/25 -- 04/29   | Presentations.               |
| 16     | 05/02 -- 05/06   |                              |
|--------+------------------+------------------------------|
| Finals | 05/08            | Final presentations.         |

<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- eval: (orgtbl-mode) -->
<!-- End: -->
