---
layout: class
title: "COMP 325, Fall 2021, Homework 1"
semester: f21
---

# Homework 1: "Arithmetic" Mystery Language[^1]

### Due Friday, August 27 by the start of class (10 AM). Submit via Gradescope.

First, you should get acquainted with the mystery languages by
[reading the
documentation](https://github.com/shriram/mystery-languages). Then go
ahead and explore the "arithmetic" family of languages.

Your goal for this (and all) mystery languages is to find the
difference between the languages. You will be given a specification of
the language's syntax, as well as a very general, sometimes vague
description of the language's semantics, generally focused on one
specific feature. There will be several implementations of the
language, each of which implements that specific feature in a
different way. You will be able to run code in each of the languages,
but you will not have access to the implementation details/code.

Your first task is to write a small(-ish) set of programs to
differentiate the languages. In other words, each program produces
different outputs on at least two of the language variants, and the
entire set of programs can distinguish between all the variants. We
call this set of programs a *classifier*. These classifers should,
above all, be clear to the grader. It can help to make them short,
although you need not be extra clever and try to come up with a single
program that differentiates all the languages -- such classifiers are
sometimes hard to understand.

Your second task is to write a short description of the difference
between the language variants, as best as you can. Focus on the new
feature and its interaction with existing features. Sometimes we might
have already covered the appropriate terminology, in which case you
should use it. But in other cases we may not have covered the
terminology yet, so you should do your best describe at a high-level
how the language variants differ.

[^1]: This assignment, like most in this course, comes from Brown University's Programming Languages course.
