---
layout: page
title: "COMP240 - Project 1: Battlecode"
semester: s24
---

Disclosure: this project is heavily based on one by Logan Mayfield.

For our first project we'll be taking a crack at
[Battlecode](https://battlecode.org/), specifically the [2024
Variation](https://play.battlecode.org/bc24/home). Battlecode is an
annual programming tournament hosted by MIT. Teams program software
bots to compete 1-on-1 against other teams. Each year a new game is
developed. 

We'll be doing our own little tournament locally -- there's no need to
officially sign up for the contest.


## Getting Started

To get going you'll need to setup a working development environment
and a GitHub repository through which your team can collaborate.

0. **Development Environment:** One of the trickiest parts of doing a
   BattleCode project can be getting the development environment
   setup. The code is done in Java and requires the much-aged Java 8.
   Follow along with the [getting
   started](https://play.battlecode.org/bc24/getting-started)
   instructions on the BattleCode site and have patience with yourself
   as you get moving. Find your classmates that are running the same
   OS as you and work through bugs with them. **When it comes time to
   setup your Battlecode repository, you should go ahead and fork the
   class repo sent via email rather than use the scaffold linked in
   the getting started guide.**
   
1. **Team Repo:** Once everyone on your team has a working development
   environment, *pick one team member's fork of the class repo to act
   as the team repo* and *invite the remaining team members as
   collaborators with at least Write level access*.

At this point everyone on the team should be able to make local copies
(`clone`s) of the team repo and you're ready to start developing your
bot.

## Projecting with Battlecode

The key to your success and continued sanity is to make small,
incremental changes. In the context of this game, that means starting
with the given example bot and repeating the following process:

1. Create a new bot that is based on an existing bot but includes some changes or improvements.
2. Play your new bot against one or more old bots in order to test your design.
3. Based on your tests, identify a new change or improvement to make. Go back to step 1.

You really cannot think too small with each successive change. Have a
vision for how that change will help your team win, but don't worry if
each individual change is just a tiny step towards that goal.

### MIT Battlecode 2024 Lecture Videos

At MIT, Battlecode is run as course. It begins with a series of
lectures designed for people new to Battlecode but with some prior
programming experience.  In short, you! [The lectures are posted on
YouTube](youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzybaECz2FwTrduZ7ZSlqST07yJIcal8W). You
are encouraged to check them out and at least use them as resource. If
you follow all of these lectures, you'll end up incrementally
developing a pretty solid, all around bot. You can also cherry pick
parts as desired.

The code for the player developed in their lectures can also be found in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/battlecode/battlecode24-lectureplayer)

# Project Deadlines

Below is the calendar for daily goals and activities as well as important due dates. Checkpoint requirements can be found after the calendar.

| Date   | Goal or Task                                                                                                                |
| :----: | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| 1/23   | Form teams. Setup communications plan. Setup team repo. <br> Explore game rules. Look at Code. Set Goals for Checkpoint 1   |
| 2/01   | Checkpoint 1, Presentation                                                                                                  |
| 2/08   | Checkpoint 2, Presentation                                                                                                  |
| 2/15   | Checkpoint 3, Presentation                                                                                                  |
| 2/22   | Final Presentation, feature freeze: only refactor/cleanup                                                                   |
| 2/23   | Final code submission                                                                                                       |

### Checkpoint Presentations

Each checkpoint should present one or more new bots representing
incremental changes to previous bots or the example bot. Do not try to
do anything earth-shattering from scratch. *You should seriously
consider following along with and implementing one or more changes
discussed in the MIT lectures.* Regardless of how you choose to work,
you must work towards and demonstrate shared knowledge and
understanding of your changes. *This means planning for and taking the
time to discuss changes such that every team member has a working
knowledge of all the changes.*

Presentation expectations are given in the syllabus. As a review
specific to this project, I'd expect something like this:

1. A small tournament between the example bot and your new bot(s).
2. A slide deck discussing: 
   - *What's New & Why:* A brief, non-technical presentation of the bot and your goal for the bot, 
   - *How You Did It* A short technical presentation of key code changes, 
   - *Team Practices* A break down of how your team functioned, what went well, and what improvements you might make to your team collaborative practices, and 
   - *What's next* What do you have in mind for your next checkpoint?

Group presentations should consist of a short slide presentation. Every member of the group must talk.

### Final Presentation

For the last presentation you should present a single, final bot. The
presentation will also be a bit more all encompassing as it should
reflect back on the sum total of your team's work and not just the
work completed since the last checkpoint. Here's what you need to talk
about:

1. *Overall bot Strategy* At a high-level, what is your bot trying to
   do? What strategies and tactics did you set out to implement?
2. *Technical Presentation* Highlight parts of the code that are
   critical to implementing your overall strategy and core tactics and
   discuss how they do what they do.
3. *Team Practices* Discuss how your team worked together as well as
   how and why your practices may have evolved from the start of the
   project. This discussion should include team strengths and team
   weaknesses, neither of these should be pinned to a specific team
   member.
4. *Next Time* You might have a new team on your next project. Discuss
   what practices you plan to bring to that team and what kinds of
   pitfalls you might have encountered on this project that you'll do
   your best to steer the next team away from.

## Grading Rubric

Your code and GitHub activity is graded as a part of the "Projects"
grade (45% of total grade):

| Category                   | Weight | Description                                                                            |
| :-                         |     -: | :-                                                                                     |
| Bot Competitiveness        |    10% | How effective is your bot against the example bot                                      |
| Bot Quality and Creativity |    25% | Did you try out reasonable things, even if it wasn't effective?                        |
| Code Quality               |    20% | Code should be *clean*: logical structure, reasonably concise, with clear comments     |
| Code Style                 |    20% | A consistent coding style is followed throughout                                       |
| Collaboration              |    25% | Evidence of code reviews through pull requests, issues, commits from all members, etc. |

Your presentations are graded separately as part of the
"Presentations" grade (35% of total grade):

| Category                 | Weight | Description                                                                                     |
| :-                       |     -: | :-                                                                                              |
| Contains Correct Content |    15% | Contains all parts specified in syllabus/instructions                                           |
| Clear Structure          |    15% | Has an outline, easy to follow high-level parts of presentation                                 |
| Appropriate Speed        |    10% | Not too slow nor too fast                                                                       |
| Slide Quality            |    10% | Slides show meaningful content without overwhelming. Not just a barrage of text.                |
| Demonstrations           |    15% | Contains demos of code and/or GitHub content. It's okay if the demos don't work as you expected |
| Teamwork                 |    15% | Every team member contributes during the presentation                                           |
| Reflection               |    20% | The team appropriately reflects on both strengths and weaknesses and plans for the future       |
