---
layout: page
title: "COMP240 - Project 3: Baseball Dashboard"
semester: s24
---

For our third project you'll be developing a web-based dashboard to
visualize and analyze baseball data. This dashboard will serve as an
interactive tool to explore various statistics and trends within the
dataset provided. The backend of the application must be implemented
in Python, while you have the freedom to choose the technologies used
for the frontend and data visualization components.

**Note**: I realize not everyone is familiar with baseball. You do NOT
need to become an expert in baseball to do this project. There is
enough flexibility in the requirements that you can learn a few things
about baseball and still ask/answer some very interesting questions
about the data. *Many* data scientists start a new job knowing NOTHING
about their dataset, so this is pretty typical, and is an opportunity
to learn how to extract and present interesting insights from any
dataset. This will prepare you for real-world scenarios.

As in the first two projects, we will continue to challenge your
programming skills while building on your ability to work in a team,
use version control effectively, and apply an [Agile
development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development)
methodology.

## Learning Goals

- Learn SQL for data retrieval and manipulation.
- Learn to integrate Python with a SQL database (PostgreSQL) for data
  retrieval.
- Practice researching and analyzing suitable technologies for a given
  project.
- Gain experience wrangling and manipulating data in Python.
- Explore data visualization techniques and tools to present data in
  an interactive and insightful manner.
- Team-based software development and project management: 
  - Agile methodology to plan, execute, and track progress, including
    the use of sprints, user stories, and retrospectives.
  - Git and GitHub for version control and collaboration
  - GitHub pull requests and comments for code reviews
  - [Git feature branch
    workflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/feature-branch-workflow)
- Independent learning and problem-solving skills
- Continue practicing presentation skills

## The Dataset: Lahman's Baseball Database

The project will utilize Lahman's Baseball Database, a comprehensive
dataset containing historical baseball data. This dataset includes
player performance statistics, team data, batting and pitching
statistics, and more, spanning from 1871 to 2022. You will have access
to a PostgreSQL database containing this information.

### Key Components of the Dataset

- People: Player names, birth dates, and biographical info.
- Batting: Batting statistics for players.
- Pitching: Pitching statistics for players.
- Teams: Yearly stats and information for each team.
- Awards: Player awards (e.g., MVP, Cy Young).

### Querying the Data

I will email you the access information necessary to access the
database. You may NOT use other forms of the Lahman database --- you
MUST use SQL to retrieve the data from my database. You may, however,
add other baseball datasets, in whatever format you choose, if you're
feeling ambitious.

You will need to learn SQL to query the data. There are many online
resources available, including [W3
Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/),
[Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/catalog/language/sql), and the
free, interactive book [Select Star SQL](https://selectstarsql.com/).

The baseball data is split up into *tables*. To ask and answer
interesting questions, you will need to **join** some of these tables
together. This will likely be the hardest aspect of SQL you'll need to
learn. See more about joins
[here](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_join.asp) and
[here](https://selectstarsql.com/hiatuses.html).

Although SQL is the query language, you will need to use this from
WITHIN Python. I highly recommend using the Python module psycopg2 as
an "adapter" to the database, SQLAlchemy to run your queries, and
Pandas for data manipulation.

## Dashboard Technologies

You are required to build a web-based dashboard, as opposed to a
native desktop or mobile app. Unlike last project's website, this app
requires both a "front" end (HTML/CSS/JavaScript) and a "back" end
that retrieves the data and perhaps does some processing. *Your
backend MUST be in Python*.

Other than that, you are free to choose what your dashboard will be
built with. In fact, research different technologies is one of the
learning goals for this project! There are some Python libraries made
specifically for dashboards. There are many others made for websites,
and you can build dashboards on top of them.

Here are a few libraries to help you start your search:

- [Plotly Dash](https://dash.plotly.com/) is made for
  dashboards. Under the hood it uses Plotly to create visualizes and
  Flask as the web serving software.
- [Panel](https://panel.holoviz.org/) is also made for dashboards, and
  is built off of Bokeh.
- [Streamlit](https://streamlit.io/) is a new library that is easy to
  build with. It *seems* less flexible than the other choices, but I
  don't have any direct experience with it, so I may be wrong.
- [Bokeh](http://bokeh.org/) is a plotting library and server, though
  it is a bit more "low-level" than something like Panel.
- [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/) is a general
  purpose web framework. You can build any kind of website with it. It
  is very flexible, though you'll need to have some other
  visualization packages to create your visualizations.
  
Find out more about Python dashboards
[here](https://pyviz.org/dashboarding/).

## Agile Development and GitHub Usage

As before, you are expected to adopt an Agile development methodology
for this project. Plan your work in one-week sprints, create user
stories, maintain a backlog of tasks, estimate the difficulty of tasks
and keep track of your velocity.

User GitHub for version control, collaborating on code through feature
branches and pull requests. I should see pull requests from everyone,
as well as comments on those pull requests that serve as code reviews.

## Weekly Checkpoints and Requirements

- **Week 1**: You need to accomplish two separate tasks during this week:
  - Research technologies and build a basic prototype or toy
    dashboard. It's fine to follow an online tutorial to do this. You
    might even build multiple toy dashboards to get a feel for which
    dashboard/visualization technology you like best.
  - Begin learning SQL and exploring the dataset. You should be able
    to retrieve part of the dataset from Python.
- Week 2: Integrate week 1's two pieces so that the dashboard shows
    some baseball information. Focus on simple things, like showing
    descriptive analytics.
- Week 3: Expand the dashboard to include interactive, exploratory
  visualizations. The user should be able to filter or subset parts of
  the data. Refine the user interface and user experience based on
  feedback.
- Week 4: Attempt to incorporate a descriptive model into the
  dashboard. Prepare for the final presentation.
  
Notice that there are no specific required visualizations or questions
to answer --- it's up to you! Imagine that you work for a baseball
executive in the 90s, before analytics was a big part of
baseball. What might be interesting and useful to them? **This is
actually the hardest part of the job for any data analyst or data
scientist: figuring out what will help your company's decision makers,
even though they don't even know!**

### What is a "Descriptive Model"

For week 4 above I mentioned you need a descriptive model. A
descriptive model aims to summarize or describe the main features of a
dataset of the relationships between variables within it. Unlike
predictive models, which forecast unobserved outcomes or future
trends, descriptive models focus on presenting the current data in a
manner that is easy to understand, highlighting patterns, trends, and
relationships that are already present in the dataset.

In the context of this project, a descriptive model could involve:

- **Correlation Analysis**: Probably the most expected
  form. Identifying and quantifying the relationships between
  variables. For instance, exploring how batting average correlates
  with runs batted in (RBIs) or home runs.
- **Trend Analysis**: Looking at how certain metrics (e.g., player
  performance, team wins) change over time. For example, how has power
  hitting or base stealing changed since the 1980s?
- **Segmentation and Clustering**: Grouping similar data points
  together to identify distinct categories within the data. For
  example, categorizing pitchers into different roles based on their
  performance statistics.
  
Normally, summary statistics would also count as a descriptive model,
but that is too simple for your last week; I expect summary statistics
to be implemented earlier.

You will probably need some additional Python libraries, such as
[statsmodels](https://www.statsmodels.org/stable/index.html) or
[scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org) to implement such a model.

## Presentations

As before, you'll have weekly checkpoint presentations. The
requirements for those are unchanged; please see project 2's
description of them.

Your final presentation will be similar, but I want you to start the
presentation as if you are presenting to a baseball executive. Demo
your dashboard, explain why it's useful and what questions it can
answer, without using technical jargon. Then, for the rest of the
presentation, target intro programming students and include the rest
of the final presentation components mentioned in project 2.

