---
layout: class
title: "COMP 401: Senior Project Research, Spring 2023"
catalog-desc: (todo)
semester: s23
---

*{{ site.data.policies.syllabus_deviation_v2 }}*

* toc
{:toc}

## Logistics

* Class meetings: Tu/Th 2:00 PM - 3:15 PM in CSB 303
* Instructors: 
  * Robert Utterback
	* Office: {{ site.data.me.office }}
	* Office Phone: {{ site.data.me.phone }}
	* Website: [{{ site.url }}]({{ site.url }})
	* Email: rutterback at MONMOUTHCOLLEGE dot EDU
  * Logan Mayfield
	* Office: CSB 344
	* Office Phone: 309.457.2200
	* Email: lmayfield at MONMOUTHCOLLEGE dot EDU
	* Website: [jlmayfield.github.io](http://jlmayfield.github.io)
* Course Website: <a href="{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}">{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}</a>
* Credits: 0.5 course credits
* Prerequisites: COMP 240 and senior status, or special approval.
* Feedback: At any time during the course you can use
  [this]({{ site.data.semesters[page.semester].feedback_form }}) to provide
  anonymous suggestions, criticism, praise, etc.

## Content and Goals

The senior project is the culminating experience of a student's major
in Computer Science and draws upon everything the student has learned
over the course of their studies. The project itself is a means to an
end and not the ultimate goal of the capstone experience. Sufficiently
interesting and complex projects rely on an abundance of existing
research and fundamental principles of computing. The project is,
from this perspective, a concrete instantiation of these ideas and
principles. By carrying out the project and presenting their work to
technical and non-technical audiences students can demonstrate their
understanding and mastery of some core element of the computing
sciences as it appears in the real world context of their project.

Students are ultimately working towards pinpointing general, abstract,
or theoretical concepts that support their project and clearly
articulating how their work is a specific instance of these
concepts. An important part of this process is the identification of
seminal scholarly work that addresses the concept and its
applications. Students too often attempt to reinvent the wheel in the
course of their capstone work. Occasionally they're unaware that the
wheel already exists. The emphasis on fundamentals is about
identifying the wheels, the documents that lay out the general
principles of those wheels, and focusing on applying those principles
to the specific needs of the project. In doing so the student will
better understand where their work sits in the broad spectrum of
computing and can present it as such.

The senior project is a year-long, two-course sequence. COMP 401, the
first in the sequence, is focused on developing a detailed proposal
for the senior project wherein the project's place in the wide arena
of computing is clear and a workable plan for completing the project
in COMP 402 is established. Students will take the half-semester to
research topics surrounding their project, identify the wider context
in which their work fits, and prepare themselves to immediately begin
implementing their proposal the in COMP 402. Throughout the semester,
students will make regular checkpoint presentations demonstrating
their progress. At the end of the semester, students well present
their proposed project to a general audience.

## Attendance and Expectations

Students in this course are expected to be respectful of their peers
and the instructor. As this course is comprised entirely of student
presentations, it is crucial that all students are always present and
always on time. Failure to arrive on time and be a productive member
of the course will have a detrimental effect on the final grade and
leaves a bad impression with faculty that are likely targets for job
and graduate school recommendations.

## Course Deliverables

The following elements of COMP 401 contribute to the overall capstone grade:

* Checkpoint presentations
* A technical presentation
* A written proposal
* A oral presentation of the proposal

### Checkpoint Presentations

Students can expect to give a 5 to 7 minutes checkpoint presentation
on a nearly weekly basis. Checkpoints for COMP 401 correspond to
sections of the written proposal and students can expect to have at
least one checkpoint per section. Refer to the proposal documents for
more details about each checkpoint topic.

At each checkpoint presentation, students are expected to demonstrate
progress towards understanding the week's topic as it relates to your
project. These presentations are meant to be an opportunity to get
feedback from peers and the instructors. A students understanding of
the topic need not be complete and they are expected to evolve as the
semester progresses.

## Technical Presentation

Halfway through the course students will give a 10 to 20 minute
technical presentation. The goal of this presentation is to present
the technical details of the concrete instantiation of a foundational
piece of computer science in the context of the capstone project. If a
project uses a specific programming language or platform, then
students might present a small program written in that language or for
that platform. If the project is written research of a theoretical
nature, then students might present a proof utilizing key proof
techniques from that research domain. If the research is more
experimental, then the students should present an experiment of the
type they expect to perform in their project. The key factor is that
*the subject matter is a relevant foundational principle in computing
and the means by which you present that topic are through the tools
and techniques you need to use to complete your project next
semester*.

### Written and Oral Proposal

The details of the proposal are given in a [separate
document]({{ page.url }}/../../proposal/).

## Grades

Students will receive an IP for this course at the completion of the
course. When COMP 402 is completed and the capstone experience is
done, a final grade will be determined and applied to both COMP 401 and
COMP 402. Students will receive regular feedback about their standing
and are always welcome to discuss their current grades with one or
both of the instructors. Grades will be determined based on the
following items:

* COMP 401 checkpoints
* COMP 401 Technical Presentation
* COMP 401 Written Proposal
* COMP 401 Proposal Presentation
* COMP 402 Checkpoint Presentations
* COMP 402 Research Poster and Scholar's Day Participation
* COMP 402 Final Presentation
* A Completed Project
* A Project Bibliography


More abstractly, what all of the above elements reflect is a student's:

* effective use of technical and problem solving skills befitting a
  major in computer science
* professionalism
* ability to make informed, mature decisions as they relate to a
  larger-scale project
* understanding and appreciation of the computing disciplines

The following examples provide an idea of what we are looking for in
the above items. **These are rough guidelines only!** Assessment
can vary considerably depending on the project.

* **A/A-/B+ range**. Steady progress is made (more or less) from start
  to finish. The student takes ownership of the project and approaches
  it the right way, with an occasional mishap. The real key is that
  **progress can be explained and justified by the student**.
* **B range**. Attempts are made to explain/justify work, but
  explanations often lack a certain level of understanding. Students
  with projects in this range are clearly saying what they think they
  need to say, sometimes reciting technical information taken verbatim
  from various sources.
* **B-/C+ range**. Little to no real planning and research in 401. An
  idea is proposed and the student talks a lot about what they want to
  do, but they never really engage in the problems they'll encounter
  when developing the project. But the student regroups in 402,
  working the right way and providing some level of understanding in
  their work.
* **C range**. Little to no real planning and research in 401 that
  carries through to 402. The student is unable to explain and justify
  their work beyond showing that something happens. Something works,
  but there are lots of bugs or missing features, sometimes including
  large components.
* **C- range or worse** Little appreciable progress throughout 401
  and 402. The student is unable to explain what they did, nor what is
  really going on in the code. The code works sometimes but not most
  times. The student shows clear signs of stringing together code or
  material from other sources with no understanding.

### Course Engagement and Workload Expectations

The weekly workload for this course will vary by student but on
average should be about 5--7 hours per week. Since class meetings are
only scheduled for 1 hour a week, we expect students to dedicate at
least 4--6 hours a week towards the development of their project
proposal and implementation. This time can include research,
preliminary coding, writing, meeting with professors, and so
forth. Being a capstone project, it is likely that your weekly work
will occasionally exceed the expected amount -- everything takes
longer than you think!

## Schedule

Checkpoint presentations will occur on roughly a weekly basis. Unless
otherwise specified, the topics listed below are the topics of
checkpoint presentations. These topics correspond to some or all of
sections of the final proposal. *This calendar is subject to change
based on the circumstances of the course.*

{: .schedule}
| Week   | Date             | Checkpoint                         |
|--------+------------------+------------------------------------|
| <l4>   | <l18>            | <l35>                              |
| 1      | 01/09 -- 01/13   | Initial Meeting                    |
| 2      | 01/16 -- 01/20   | Project Ideas                      |
| 3      | 01/23 -- 01/27   | Background: Projects and Problems  |
| 4      | 01/30 -- 02/03   | Background: Technical and Social   |
| 5      | 02/06 -- 02/10   | Foundations                        |
| 6      | 02/13 -- 02/17   | Foundations                        |
| 7      | 02/20 -- 02/24   |                                    |
| 8      | 02/27 -- 03/03   | Tech-Talk Proposal                 |
| --     | (03/06 -- 03/10) | (Spring Break)                     |
| 9      | 03/13 -- 03/17   | Tech-Talk Check-In                 |
| 10     | 03/20 -- 03/24   | Tech-Talk                          |
| 11     | 03/27 -- 03/31   |                                    |
| 12     | 04/03 -- 04/07   | Features and Specifications        |
| 13     | 04/10 -- 04/14   | Plan and Timeline                  |
| 14     | 04/17 -- 04/21   |                                    |
| 15     | 04/24 -- 04/28   | Written Proposal Due. Presentation |
| 16     | 05/01 -- 05/05   |                                    |
|--------+------------------+------------------------------------|
| Finals | 05/08            |                                    |


<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- eval: (orgtbl-mode) -->
<!-- End: -->
