---
layout: class
title: "COMP 410: Research in Computer Science, Fall 2021"
catalog-desc: (todo)
semester: f21
---

*On November 1, 2021, I will start paternity leave. We might not meet
as often after this date.*

* toc
{:toc}

## Logistics

* Meetings: By arrangement, in my Zoom room
* Instructors: Robert Utterback
  * Office: {{ site.data.me.office }}
  * [Personal Zoom Room]({{ site.data.me.zoom }})
  * Office Phone: {{ site.data.me.phone }}
  * Website: [{{ site.url }}]({{ site.url }})
  * Email: rutterback at MONMOUTHCOLLEGE dot EDU
* Course Website: <a href="{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}">{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}</a>
* Credits: 0.5 or 1.0 course credits, as arranged.
* Prerequisites: Special approval.
* Feedback: At any time during the course you can use
  [this]({{ site.data.semesters[page.semester].feedback_form }}) to provide
  anonymous suggestions, criticism, praise, etc.

## Content and Goals

This semester I'd like to make some good progress on my existing
online text analytics tool. The current version exists
[here](https://github.com/monmouth-college-cs/kieft21-text-dashboard/),
which you should all have access to.

There are an overwhelming number of ways to improve the project. On
the bigger side are things like:

* Store the data in an appropriate database, such as MongoDB, throughout the pipeline.
* Use `spaCy` pipelines, with custom nodes as needed.
* Rewrite the front-end. React is heavyweight, but an option. Others:
  Svelte, vanilla JS [web
  components](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Components), or some
  other lightweight library.
* Use advanced neural networks to produce word vectors, probably using
  [Huggingface's Transformers
  library](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers).
* Add user accounts.
* Support extra labels for each article, plus the ability for users to
  manually annotate (on the website) each article with various
  labels. This leads to supervised learning.
* Instead of one big analysis, separate into different kinds of analyses.
* Add time series features to handle publication date metadata.

And some smaller things:

* Fix bugs (see Github issues)
* Clean up the code: use a consistent style, refactor into separate components, etc.
* Add documentation, and maybe even an interactive tutorial
* Add tests.
* The ability to upload entire folders, instead of a zip file.
* Handle more input file formats.
* More clustering options: Hierarchical, DBSCAN, etc., plus more 2D/3D
  projection options, including UMAP.
  
Through progress in these goals students will:

* Improve their Python skills, especially in the text analytics space
* Maintain software projects using `git` and Github
* Learn about the field of text analytics

## Expectations and Policies

We will have 30 minute weekly meetings. If you're taking this for 0.5
credits, we'll meet just once per week; twice per week for 1.0
credits. In these meetings we'll take a look at your work and set
objectives for the next week. You are expected to make each and every
meeting or to make arrangements ahead of time to make up a misse
dmeeting. At each meeting you will present the current state of your
work and demonstrate that you've made progress since the last
meeting. *You are encouraged to seek out help and guidance between
meetings if you're stuck or lacking in direction*. You are also
encouraged to work the other members of the research team, even if
they are not an expert on your particular topic.

At the end of each meeting we will set clear goals and objectives for
the next week based on the current state of the work. If you find that
you cannot meet an objective in a reasonable amount of time due to
unforeseen difficulty, that's fine. Just be ready to explain what you
tried, what worked, what didn't work, and, to the best of your
ability, the nature of the problem. Account for the time you spent on
the research. The work should be neatly done, well-documented, and
conform to the standards of the open source projects to which we hope
to contribute.

## Grades and Grading

Grades are a function of being prompt, prepared, and producing high
quality work. These things are assessed at our weekly meetings through
the work presented at each meeting. You can safely assume that no news
is good news. If your making meetings and showing work at each meeting
but not being told the work is somehow insufficient, then you can
expect an A. When the work is insufficient or poorly done, then you
will be told as much and given feed back on what is lacking and what
needs improvement. At midterm you will be told your current grade. If
at any other time you want a clear, explicit indication of your grade
you need only ask. In general, grading follows the rubric given below.

| Grade | Meeting Attendance | Weekly Work State                                 | Quality of Work                       |
|-------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------|
| A     | Never misses       | Always ample work shown                           | Well done                             |
| B     | Missed a few       | Work sometimes insufficient                       | Occasionally sloppy. Error free.      |
| C     | Missed a lot       | Regularly insufficient, occasionally not started. | Occasionally sloppy. Frequent Errors. |
| D     | Missed a lot       | Regularly not started                             | Sloppy and error prone                |
| F     | Missed most        | Nothing significant to show                       | Sloppy and full of errors             |

### Course Workload Expectations

For the 0.5 credit version, we'll meet for 0.5 hours a week, and
outside of our meetings you are expected to dedicate 4.5-7.5 hours of
work on this research, for a total of 5-8 hours.

For the 1.0 credit version, we'll meet for 1 hours a week, and
outside of our meetings you are expected to dedicate 10-12 hours of
work on this research, for a total of 11-13 hours.

<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- eval: (orgtbl-mode) -->
<!-- End: -->
